Create 2023-09-01-udsbinding.markdown (#12)
CoreWCF/corewcf.github.io: _posts/2023-09-01-udsbinding.markdown

---
# Layout
layout: post
title:  "Introducing Unix Domain Socket binding support in CoreWCF and WCF Client"
date:   2023-09-01 13:00:00 -0800
categories: release
# Author
author: Biroj Nayak (https://github.com/birojnayak)
---
#### Introduction

> With the new V1.5.0 CoreWCF release, CoreWCF will have an additional binding called Unix Domain Socket Binding both in CoreWCF and WCF Client. The reason for enabling UDS(Unix Domain Socket) binding inside CoreWCF and WCF Client is to provide an alternative for NetNamedPipe in Linux. NetNamedPipe is only meant for windows, while UDS is allowed in Linux and Windows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the new v1.5.0-preview1 CoreWCF release, CoreWCF will have an additional binding using Unix Domain Sockets (UDS) for CoreWCF and the WCF Client. The reason for enabling UDS inside CoreWCF and the WCF Client is to provide an alternative for NetNamedPipe on Linux. NetNamedPipe only works in Windows, while UDS is cross platform supported on Linux and Windows.
```

### How this works

> We expose and extension method called `UseUnixDomainSocket`. As part of the extension method, we inject `UnixDomainSocketHostedService` and `UnixDomainSocketFramingOptionsSetup` into the DI . `UnixDomainSocketHostedService` is of type `IHostedService`, and `UnixDomainSocketFramingOptionsSetup` is of type `IConfigureOptions<KestrelServerOption>`.  So when initilization happens via `Ihost.StartAsyc`, the `StartAsync` method of `UnixDomainSocketHostedService` is called via asp.netcore pipeline, and that calls the `Configure` method of `UnixDomainSocketFramingOptionsSetup`, which calls the `ListenUnixSocket` method of kestrel by providing the path. Before passing the filepath, we check if path exist; if it is, we delete the path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have added a new extension method called `UseUnixDomainSocket`. This extension method adds all the types to DI that are necessary for CoreWCF to configure ASP.NET Core for the UDS transport. We implement the UDS transport using a hosted service which implements `IHostedService`. This hosted service creates its own instance of `KestrelServer` and configures it to use Unix domain sockets. We implemented it this way as a `KestrelServer` instance can only use a single transport type. This enables using Kestrel for TCP based communication for handling HTTP requests via the regular ASP.NET Core configuration mechanisms without conflicting with the need for CoreWCF to use Unix domain sockets.
```

### Authentication Model

> As of the time of release it only supports two security moodes. SecurityMode None and Transport. Under the SeucityMode Transport, we support four modes for the client and server to validate each other. Those 4 modes are `Certificate`, `Default`, `IdentityOnly` (Linux only), `Windows`. `IdentityOnly` mode was specifically introduced for Linux OS, keeping unix posix identity in mind. When `ClientCredentialType` is set to `IdentityOnly`, the server figures out the client user information who is connecting to the socket by calling few system native APIs and add that as ClaimsIdentity for future use. When ClientCredential type is set to `Default`, for Windows OS, it defaults to mode 'Window` and for Linux it sets to `IdentityOnly`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the initial release, UDS supports two security modes, None and Transport. This matches the capabilities of the NetNamedPipe binding as they are intended for use in the same scenarios. When using Transport security, we support four client credential types. These are:  
* Default
* Certificate
* Windows
* IdentityOnly - Only supported on Linux 

The client credential type of `IdentityOnly` mode was specifically introduced for Linux OS. As the name suggests, it provides the service with the identity of the calling client, but it does not encrypt or sign the data that flows back and forth between the client and the service. As UDS is used for communication between processes on the same host, the communication can't be observed by a 3rd party host. If you wish to keep the communication private from other processes on the same machine, we recommend you use the Certificate client credential type which will secure the communication using TLS.  

The server gets the user information for the process that owns the client end of the socket and populates the Claims information. This allows authorizing clients with a custom authorization manager without the need to manage any additional infrastructure such as certificate distribution. When a client makes a service call, the username is populated in a `GenericIdentity` wrapped in a `ClaimsIdentity` and is available from `OperationContext.ServiceSecurityContext.PrimaryIdentity`. The `ClaimsIdentity` instance will have the following claims added.
| Claim Type | Purpose/Value |
|--------|--------|
| http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/ws/2005/05/identity/claims/posixgroupid | The id of the group the client process belongs to |
| http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/ws/2005/05/identity/claims/posixgroupname | The nane of the group the client process belongs to |
| http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/ws/2005/05/identity/claims/processid | The process id of the client process |
 
The client credential type `Default` uses a different type based on the OS. When running on Windows, it's equivalent to `Windows` and will authenticate the client the same way as NetNamedPipe authenticates. When running on Linux, it's equivalent to `IdentityOnly`.
```

#### Getting Started

> The way to initialize service in your statuup class is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is how you initialize a service in your start up class:
```

```csharp
var hostBuilder = Host.CreateDefaultBuilder(Array.Empty<string>());
hostBuilder.UseUnixDomainSocket(options =>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

{
    options.Listen(new Uri("net.uds://" + "yoursocketfilepath"));
});
hostBuilder.ConfigureServices(services => services.AddServiceModelServices());
IHost host = hostBuilder.Build();
CoreWCF.UnixDomainSocketBinding serverBinding = new CoreWCF.UnixDomainSocketBinding(SecurityMode.);
host.UseServiceModel(builder =>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

{
    builder.AddService<Services.TestService>();
    builder.AddServiceEndpoint<Services.TestService, ServiceContract.ITestService>(serverBinding, "net.uds://" + "yoursocketfilepath");

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

});

> await host.StartAsync();

Reviewer: Using `RunAsync` instead deals with the problem of what to do once it's started. If you just run out the bottom of your app code, the process will exit.
```suggestion
await host.RunAsync();
```

```

> Once service started the client can be used like below,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the service has been started, the client can be used like below:
```

```csharp
System.ServiceModel.UnixDomainSocketBinding binding = new UnixDomainSocketBinding(System.ServiceModel.SecurityMode.Transport);
binding.Security.Transport.ClientCredentialType = System.ServiceModel.UnixDomainSocketClientCredentialType.IdentityOnly;
var factory = new System.ServiceModel.ChannelFactory<ClientContract.ITestService>(binding, new System.ServiceModel.EndpointAddress(new Uri("net.uds://" + yoursocketfilepath)));
channel = factory.CreateChannel();
((IChannel)channel).Open();
string result = channel.EchoString(testString);
```

> For using the WCF client for UDS binding please use `  <add key="ClientPackages" value="https://pkgs.dev.azure.com/dotnet/CoreWCF/_packaging/ClientPackages/nuget/v3/index.json" />` as your package source until WCF client team makes the full release.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
The UDS client packages will be released as part of the WCF Client project at https://github.com/dotnet/wcf. They aren't ready to be released from that project yet. While in preview, you can get a copy of WCF Client packages from a temporary CoreWCF nuget feed. Add the following to your `nuget.config` file to be able to retrieve a privately built set of packages.
```xml
    <add key="ClientPackages" value="https://pkgs.dev.azure.com/dotnet/CoreWCF/_packaging/ClientPackages/nuget/v3/index.json" />
```
````

#### Thanks

> Thanks to AWS(https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/opensource/category/programing-language/dot-net/) for supporting this project since last 3 years.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to AWS(https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/opensource/category/programing-language/dot-net/) for supporting this project for the last 3 years.
```
